You are listening to a message from First Baptist Church, Wichita Falls.
For more information about First Baptist, click the link in the show notes or go to fbcwf.org.
Today's message comes from Senior Pastor Dr. Bob McCartney.
Good morning.
Want to welcome those of you at Shepherd Campus, those of you at 11 East and those of you at West Campus.
Thank you for being here this morning as well.
As those of you who join us either on television or online, I occasionally get some communication from folks who, most of the time we're here with Shepherd Air Force Base or sometimes with MSU and they've moved away and they still at least occasionally watch our services.
Sometimes it's quite regularly so there's a family in upstate New York that I just love and
They watch us every single week just about.
And so welcome.
We're glad you're part of First Baptist Church, Wichita Falls, Texas.
Let's open our Bibles this morning to Ecclesiastes chapter four.
We're going to talk about this morning what may sound like a very depressing passage of scripture for a while.
I'm just going to be honest with you.
But Solomon is going to help us understand how we are better together.
When I was growing up, one of the more popular sports on television was professional boxing.
And I grew up in an era when there were names like Muhammad Ali, Ken Norton, Joe Frazier, and a guy named George Foreman.
George Foreman later went on to fame selling grills, but he was actually a very famous boxer and by the way became a Christian minister.
But he came to fame, really, and came into the public eye in 1968 at the Mexico City Olympics.
When other athletes were protesting the American flag, and our country was divided much like it is today, George Foreman won the heavyweight gold medal at the Olympics, and he took an American flag and he walked around the ring with it.
He endeared himself to the American people when he did that.
He went on to become a professional.
in his professional career he was undefeated and the heavyweight champion of the world at that time was a guy named Joe Frazier who was a street brawler.
I mean he was tough and he was undefeated and they matched them up in a world heavyweight title match.
George Foreman in four rounds knocked down Joe Frazier six times and the referee finally ended the fight and gave him a technical knockout
and George Foreman became the heavyweight champion of the world.
In his book, he wrote of that moment, amid the chance of champ, champ, champ, I heard someone refer to me as the king of men.
Instantly I was swept away by a magic carpet to another world at 23 years old, lacking either a true friend,
or a sense of moral direction, that would eventually become a haunted house.
He goes on to say, I knew that night that all those people who were surrounding me would have abandoned me, ditched me, and left me alone if I had lost that fight.
All of my so-called friends would have abandoned me.
That thought made me angry.
I was empty, searching, lost,
And at the same time on top of the world, Solomon would say, I know exactly how you feel.
And for some of you in this room, you've been there.
You've accomplished things.
You've had victories.
You've had wins.
Things have gone your way.
And yet there is something inside you that feels alone and isolated.
And you wonder,
Along with George Foreman and Solomon, would these people still surround me in the losses of life like they do when I'm winning?
You know, as a king, you can surround yourself with whomever you want.
But the people who surround you as a king always say yes.
Nobody says no to the king.
They laugh at your jokes.
They think you're funny because they're
There's some benefit in them laughing at your jokes.
They are, they are sycophants many times.
They're false friends.
And Solomon wondered himself, where can I find a true friend?
Solomon felt isolated and alone on the throne.
There is that adage, it is lonely at the top.
I think you're doing it wrong if it's lonely at the top, but Solomon certainly felt that way.
And that is true in our own culture.
There are so many people who feel isolated and alone.
It is not a modern problem.
Solomon experienced it in his own life.
There is an increasing mental health crisis among younger generations, especially among younger men.
who feel like they have to do this all on their own.
And the pressure and the anxiety and the sense that I am failing and I am falling behind grows heavier and heavier on men.
And here's the problem with that guys.
I want you to listen to me.
I'm going to speak a lot to the men today.
But men, the problem with that is some of you think that's normal and it's not.
It's not the way life was meant to be lived.
You were not meant to live life in a silo all alone.
And so Solomon gives us chapter four and he's been making a lot of observations about life.
Some of them have been uncomfortable and to be honest with you, some of these observations are uncomfortable today, but there's a reason that he's doing this.
Solomon is not painting us a pretty picture.
He's giving us a mirror.
So that we see ourselves very, very clear and we see our society very, very clear.
And so he asked a question in this passage, what is this living under the sun?
What, what has this life under the sun done to us relationally?
Now, obviously it's severed us from the vertical relationship with a God who created us and loved us.
But how does that work this under the sun living, this living without any thought of eternity?
How does that affect relationships with other people?
And Solomon is going to really dig in on this and so we're going to as well as we read through this passage.
I can summarize this message very succinctly in a single simple sentence.
Here it is.
Life is hard.
Don't do it alone.
That's what Solomon's gonna tell us.
Life is hard, don't do it alone.
Let's look first of all at the danger of isolation.
Now Solomon is gonna do this through a series of observations, some a bit uncomfortable.
And the first one is, look at chapter four, verse one.
Again, I observed all the acts of oppression being done under the sun.
Look at the tears of those who are oppressed.
They have no one to comfort them.
power is with those who oppress them.
Solomon, first of all, observes that oppression leads to loneliness and isolation.
Oh, if you're a winner, you have people who are hangers on and false friends who will rally to your side, lose, suffer a setback, and you'll wonder where they all went sometimes in our culture.
Well, Solomon is looking at a people who are oppressed.
Most of the time in that culture, as in ours, it would be the poor or perhaps there was some racial disparity.
And he says, I looked at those who were oppressed and there's nobody there for them.
Now, occasionally I have to be honest with you.
I'm studying a passage and I start asking questions of the passage.
Or maybe sometimes I start in my mind, I start asking questions of the person who wrote it.
And I have a question for Solomon here.
You say you saw this oppression and there's no one to comfort them.
As a matter of fact, he says there was no one to comfort them twice, which means he's really trying to drive that home.
You're the king.
Couldn't you have done something about it?
Of course he could.
Solomon though is making this observation for our benefit because he knew that oppression, those who were gonna be downtrodden by the rich and the powerful was always going to be a part
of a sin fractured world.
You see, in a sin fractured world, injustice and isolation are a reality of life.
They don't have to be, but that is where this leads.
And so Solomon is telling us that this reality that there is no one to comfort them means he's exposing the relational emptiness around him.
That's the first observation that he makes.
Then he makes a second observation that rivalry leads to envy.
Look down at verse four.
I saw all labor and all the skillful work is due to one person's jealousy of another.
This too is futile and a pursuit of the wind.
The fool folds his arms and consumes his own flesh.
Better one hand full with rest than two hand fulls with effort in the pursuit of the wind.
Now, that's a bit of an uncomfortable passage because ambition is not a bad thing.
If you have a little bit of ambition, as a matter of fact, I would challenge some of you
Maybe you need to get a little bit more ambition and be a little bit more industrious and do a little bit more work.
It'd be okay, really.
He says the fool folds his arms and consumes his own flesh, but there's also a balance to be had.
And while it is a good thing to be somewhat ambitious and to have some plans and desires and dreams for your life and to work hard on those, when it becomes bad is when it crosses a line into envy and jealousy and rivalry.
I mean, I want to do well.
You want to do well.
We want to live in a nice home.
We want to have decent cars to drive.
Occasionally take a nice trip somewhere.
Have a little money's tucked away for a retirement someday, though I don't know if that's ever going to happen for me.
I mean, we all want to do well.
But Solomon says something in this passage that's interesting.
He says, I saw all the labor and skillful work is due to one person's
jealousy of another.
The New American Standard Bible translates that rivalry.
This is a moment when a 2900 year old book speaks directly to who we are.
You see, social media has created this environment where the prevailing mentality is, I don't just want to do well.
I want to do better than you.
That's dangerous.
It's not just that I have ambition.
It's that I just want to outshine you.
I want to be a little bit better than you.
That's what he means by this sense of rivalry, jealousy, and envy.
And social media just feeds that.
I don't want to preach on social media every Sunday, but it's amazing how that it applies to passages like this.
Just be careful that someone else's
carefully curated, highly filtered, joyful story doesn't cloud your view of God's blessings in your life.
And don't compare your reality to someone else's work of fiction on social media.
Work of fiction.
That's what most of it is.
Especially if you look at those reels
You can't tell what's real and what's not with the advancements in AI.
I mean, those videos of that cute little kid who tells the puppy, don't bucket me with friends.
I thought that's the cutest thing I'd ever seen.
And then I saw three more reels with a different kid, a different puppy saying the same thing.
It's AI generated.
It's not real.
And so much of what we produce on social media is meant to be our highlight reel, not real life.
People show that meal that they prepared, you know?
Nobody ever posts, this is my third attempt at dinner and we're eating cereal because I burned the chicken.
Nobody posts that.
Come on.
But Solomon is saying to us that we live in such a culture that in our flesh,
always turns ambition to rivalry if you are not very careful and you don't surrender your ambition to the will of God.
The third thing that he talks about is this competition and this accumulation.
He looked at verse seven.
He says, I saw futility under the sun.
There is a person without a companion, without even a son or brother
And though there is no end to all his struggles, his eyes are not content with riches, who am I struggling for?
He asked and depriving myself of good things.
This too is futile and a miserable task.
He says, I see this guy, he's working so hard.
He's accumulating so much, he's gathering so much.
And he doesn't have a son.
He doesn't have a brother.
He doesn't have an heir.
When he dies,
He's just gonna leave it all behind.
Now, there is a moment in this passage, and I don't wanna be too technical with you, with the Hebrew, that there is an interpretive debate among Old Testament Hebrew scholars.
I wanna show it to you, and I'm gonna show you another translation to help you understand.
The question is, in verse eight,
when he says, who am I struggling for?
He asked and depriving myself of good things.
In the original language of the Old Testament, Hebrew, it simply says, does he say, why am I struggling for all this?
So the interpretation is he's doing all this work and does he say.
So the Christian standard Bible that I'm reading from takes it the more positive that he actually says that.
The New American Standard Bible, though, I think is right.
Let me read this to you from the New American Standard Bible.
There was a certain man without a dependent having neither a son or a brother, and yet there was no end to all his labor.
Indeed, his eyes were not satisfied with Richard's riches, and he never asked.
And for whom am I laboring, depriving myself of such pleasure?
This to his vanity, it is a grievous task.
He's working so hard, he's accumulating, and he never asked himself,
Who is this for?
In the middle part of the last century, there was a guy named Howard Hughes.
Howard Hughes was a film producer.
He was an aviation pioneer.
He was an industrialist.
He was one of the first people to ever become a billionaire, not with an M, with a B, a billionaire.
And that was huge money in the 1950s, 1960s, 1970s.
But he didn't have a wife and he never had any children.
Later in his life, just before he died in 1976, he became a recluse.
He got so afraid that he was gonna get a disease and die that he isolated himself.
He owned three huge mansions and he wound up living the last three years of his life in a hotel room with the curtains drawn and only two, he only allowed two people access to him.
When he died,
He left a fortune worth over $2.5 billion and no error.
There were over 50 wills produced claiming their share of the Howard Hughes inheritance.
It took a court years to sort out who was going to get that inheritance.
Does he ever ask himself, why am I accumulating all this?
Why am I gathering all of this?
There is a sense of selfishness in that.
And then he says one other, one other sort of negative thing.
And if you're feeling uncomfortable like, man, this is not building me up.
It's not edifying.
It's not meant to.
Solomon is trying to make you really uncomfortable.
And Solomon does a similar thing at the end of the passage.
So I'm going to skip some verses and I'll come back to them.
We think with Western civilization, Aristotelian logic, we would put things in a specific order and then come to a conclusion.
Solomon doesn't do that.
He had never been introduced to Aristotelian logic.
He had never had a class in that.
He thinks like an ancient Near Eastern person and it's more in the form of a poem.
So look down at verse 13.
Better a poor but wise youth than an old and foolish king who no longer pays attention to warnings.
For he came from prison to be king even though he was born poor in his kingdom.
I saw all the living who moved about under the sun, follow a second youth who succeeds him.
There is no limit to all the people who were before them.
Yet those who come later will not rejoice in him.
This too is futile in the pursuit of the wind.
Who is he talking about there?
This young king, this old king.
Well, I would join a host of Old Testament scholars who believe that he's talking about his father.
The young king is David.
The old king who would not listen to instruction is Saul.
And that is very true of who Saul was because Saul received warning after warning after he'd been crowned king of Israel from a prophet named Samuel.
And Samuel came to me and said, Saul, you must follow the Lord.
You must obey the Lord.
And Saul was really his reputation was this.
He would do part of what God told him to do.
He would always kind of obey God, but not fully obey God.
And partial obedience is disobedience.
And so Saul got in trouble.
He lost the kingdom.
David becomes king.
So I believe this youth, this wise youth that became king was David.
And the foolish king is Saul who lost the kingdom.
Now there is one little problem with that.
We don't have any record of David being in prison.
But the Hebrew word there means a place of confinement, and it could very well refer to the cave of Adulam, when David had to hold up in a cave and Saul was trying to kill him and all that sort of thing.
But then Solomon says this, he said, and there is a second youth who succeeds him.
He's talking about himself there.
But listen to what he comes to the conclusion of.
He says, my father became king.
And they wrote songs.
They really did.
They wrote songs about Him.
And they praised Him and they applauded Him.
And I became king and they praised me and they applauded me.
Yet those who come later will not rejoice in Him.
Those who come later will not applaud Him.
They will not remember Him.
They will not sing His praises.
the applause of men, the approval of the crowd, the crowd patting you on the back and telling you how wonderful you are.
Let me explain this to you.
If you are an athlete, it will fade someday.
It all goes away.
Andre Agassi was one of the best tennis players of his generation.
In the 1990s, he won eight Grand Slam titles.
Product endorsements came his way.
Beautiful women came his way.
He dated and eventually married beautiful women.
In his autobiography, Open, Andre Agassi told a startling truth.
He said, I hate tennis.
I hate tennis.
And then he went on to tell why.
Those stadiums that were filled and the crowds that roared when he won,
Wimbledon or the US Open, those crowds that cheered him disappeared so quickly and he says I would go back to my hotel room and I was alone and broken and empty.
Let me tell you something, whether it's the applause of the crowd, the approval of your boss, whether it's a pat on the back from people who esteem you,
it will all fade.
That's what Solomon is trying to tell us, that life alone will not work for us.
And then he turns to the answer, at least the answer for this section.
What do you do about that then?
He turns from the danger of isolation to the blessing of community.
Look at verse nine.
Solomon comes to the point
Two are better than one.
That's the point.
2900 years before boys like girls in 2009 sang two are better than one.
And my 35 year old swooned for just a minute right there.
Remember their teenage years.
It was a pop song for those of you who don't know.
Solomon knew two are better than one.
because they have a good reward for their efforts.
For if either falls, his companion can lift him up, but pity the one who falls without another to lift him up.
Also, if two lie down together, they can keep warm.
But how can one person alone keep warm?
And if someone overpowers one person, two can resist him.
A cord of three strands is not easily broken.
Two are better than one.
Two are better than one when it comes to work.
That should be obvious to us, right?
He says, if you work alone, you can only accomplish so much.
In the world of draft horses, those big horses like Clydesdales that pull wagons, there is a commonly quoted statistic, and a lot of it depends on what kind of wagon you put the horses with, but one Clydesdale can pull about 8,000 pounds, which is pretty impressive.
Two Clydesdales, however,
They don't pull 8,000 pounds.
They don't pull 16,000 pounds, which you'd think that's double.
They actually can pull about 24,000 pounds.
That's pretty impressive.
Now, what he's saying to us is two are better than one because there is a multiplication effect for your labor.
He says two are better than one when it comes to a crisis.
For if either falls, his companion can lift him up, but pity the one who falls without another to lift him up.
In 2003, Aaron Ralston was in Canyonlands National Park in Utah.
He's a rock climber.
And those canyons have incredible places to climb.
And as he was moving along the wall of one particular ridge,
He put his hand up on a boulder, and when he did, the boulder actually moved.
It was an 800-pound boulder, and it was one of those things where he was just waiting for one little nudge for it to fall.
And when it fell, it pinned his right arm and hand underneath it.
The boulder weighed about 800 pounds, and he was alone.
After five days of running out of water and becoming delirious, he made the decision to save his life by losing his arm.
tied a tourniquet around his arm above his elbow and self amputated his right arm with a knife that he had and walked out of canyon lands.
That may sound heroic.
I think it sounds dumb.
You should have had somebody with you.
If you go it alone, maybe they could go get help.
I don't know if you can still save an arm after an 800 pound boulder falls on it.
But look at what Solomon says.
for if one falls, his companion can lift him up, but pity the one who falls without another to lift him up.
It's also true in the ancient Near East when it comes to cold weather.
Now they do have winter.
We think of the ancient Near East as always hot in the desert, but they have winter.
It snows sometimes in Jerusalem, but here's what they didn't have in Solomon's day.
They had no way to know what we would call a Northern was going to blow through and the temperature is going to drop 40, 50 degrees and a matter of hours.
And when that happens, if you were a traveler and you were caught out in some sort of winter storm, if you were alone, there would be no way to keep warm.
But two could huddle together and keep warm.
This isn't about romance, it's about survival.
Solomon is saying two can also are better than one when it comes to conflict, when it comes to warfare.
If someone overpowers one person,
Two can resist him.
Jesus told the story of the Good Samaritan, and in that story, there is a traveler, and he is traveling alone, and he is ambushed by a bunch of burglars and thugs, and they beat him up and leave him for dead because he was traveling alone.
One gets ambushed, they get beaten up and robbed, but two possibly could resist those who would attack them.
This is not some sort of ancient poem.
This is not sentimentality.
This is survival theology that he's giving us.
And here's the issue.
The issue is that for so many of us men, we have been led to believe that somehow it is heroic to be the stoic, to stand alone.
We have somehow been led to believe
that to be a man means you are to be self-sufficient and independent.
Let me explain this to you.
God did not create you for independence.
Independence is a great national concept.
It is a horrible personal virtue.
It is.
You were not meant to be independent.
First of all,
And primarily you were meant to be dependent on God.
But we were meant to be interdependent.
I depend on you.
You depend on me.
We depend on each other in this life in the community of believers.
You see, this is why God gave us the church.
Romans chapter 12 verse 5 says, in the same way we who are many are one body in Christ and individually we are members of one another.
We are members of one another.
We were intended to live life in community, not in isolation.
Solomon finally figures that out.
Two are better than one.
It is better that we come together and that we rely on one another.
Now I want to make this very straightforward.
If you come to church on Sunday mornings, I am really happy about that.
Whatever campus you come to, I'm really glad you're here.
Because what we do in this room, I really do believe matters.
We observe the life changing message of the gospel through baptism this morning.
It encourages us.
We sing songs of praise and especially this morning, we sang from the heart
of our struggles sometimes.
There is something about worship and singing that connects us in union with God that I don't know if I get any other way.
We open God's word, we hear His truth in this room.
So what happens in this room is important.
But I need you to hear me.
In this room, right now, you are looking at one face and the back of everybody else's head.
That's it.
That is not the way you grow in community.
You grow in community in circles where we're looking at one another, not in rows.
Now you can grow in worship and in knowledge and encouragement, yes, but we grow in community in life groups in this church.
That's the way we do it.
Our strategy is life groups and whether that's an on campus life group or an at home life group,
That's our strategy.
And I will tell you that if you'll get involved, it works.
Those are the people that when you have a tragedy, they're going to be there.
Those are the people that when you have a victory, they're going to celebrate with you.
And that feels good.
Those are the people that when you are struggling, they're going to come alongside you and hold you up.
When you are questioning, they're going to patiently help you walk through it.
Those are the people that you are going to walk through life with.
And the truth is that you grow more as a disciple of Jesus in that kind of environment.
It just happens.
God works through that.
And so if you are not a part of a life group,
I wanna challenge you.
I really wanna encourage you.
I want to exhort you.
That needs to be a part of who you are.
Some of you guys, especially, I'm gonna talk to you.
I told you I was gonna talk to you.
Some of you come to church, you smile.
Some of you serve, but you are living in a silo.
And for you, I just have a challenge for you.
You need to go to the next 4KK retreat that our young adult pastor, Justin Bindle, does.
You need to go.
If you're a young adult guy, I just want to encourage you.
And young means younger than me.
That's all.
Anybody can go, actually.
But in that moment, I'm going to tell you, you're going to experience a couple of things.
And one of them is you're going to figure out
that you're not alone.
One of the most liberating things in life is when you allow God to break the satanic chains of isolation and his believing you are on your own.
It's all up to you.
You don't have a friend.
You don't have a companion.
But Solomon does something really interesting at the end of this section.
I think it's really the point of the whole thing.
that's tucked away kind of in the middle of the chapter.
It's at the end of this passage.
And so we almost fly.
I think we fly over it.
And while Solomon would say, you need a true friend, a brotherhood, a sisterhood.
You need a close community of people to walk through life with.
I want you to listen to this.
He said this over and over, two are better than one.
Two are better than one for the labor.
Two are better than one when they fall.
Two are better than one when they get cold.
Two are better than one when there's a conflict.
A cord of three strands is not easily broken.
I have used this passage at every wedding I have ever done.
Every one of them.
because I really do believe it's got a great application for marriage.
And what I say to them is two are better than one, but a cord of three strands is not easily broken.
So who's that third strand?
It's Jesus.
It's real simple.
I mean, you knew the answer was going to be Jesus ultimately.
But if you allow him to be the third cord and he's talking about a rope that has
It's woven together.
One strand would snap pretty easy.
Two is a little bit stronger, but a three strand rope.
It's not easily broken.
You need to let Jesus Christ be the third strand in your life, in your relationships, in your marriage, in your friendships.
Because a cord of three strands is not easily broken.
You've been listening to a message from First Baptist Church, Wigital Falls.
For more information about First Baptist, including gathering times and locations, click the link in the show notes or go to fbcwf.org.
We'll see you next week.